---
title: "AKCCHF grant #01239-A (closed)"
layout: single
---

**Final Report:**Â  Cryptorchidism, or retained testicles, is one of the
common congenital problems in dogs. The testes of cryptorchids are more
prone to testicular cancer and infertility. Hence cryptorchids and
animals carrying genes for cryptorchidism should be eliminated from the
breeding population. Some evidence exists to suggest that it appears to
be caused by many genes.

Therefore, the present study was performed to find the genetic
differences on all chromosomes (genome wide) between 24 unrelated
cryptorchid male dogs (cases) and 24 normal dogs (controls). A total of
173,662 genetic differences called single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) through out the genome were tested between 24 cases and 24
controls using the CanineHD Genotyping BeadChip at GeneSeek, Lincoln,
NE. Several advanced statistical methods including case-control
association analyses and haplotype analyses using the PLINK software and
Bayesian methods using GenSel software were implemented to find the
associated chromosomal regions and the genes within the regions for
canine cryptorchidism.

Our statistical association analyses indicated a better association of a
region on chromosome 27 containing a gene called collagen type II alpha
1 (COL2A1) with this defect. These results are in agreement with our
earlier study, which also found the association of COL2A1 utilizing a
different approach called candidate gene approach. Hence the present
results are very interesting but still inconclusive. However, since this
study used only 24 cases and 24 controls, the results need to be further
validated with a larger number of cryptorchid cases and controls.

A similar project funded by CHF with a larger number of cases and
controls is now ongoing in our laboratory. It is likely that a
recommendation will be provided for future genetic tests for canine
cryptorchidism after the completion of this ongoing CHF funded project
(Grant number 1248) with more number of cases and controls.
