---
title: "AKCCHF grant #01130 (closed)"
layout: single
---

**Susan E Lana, DVM, Colorado State University \[\$2500\]**

**_Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:_**

"Most canine patients treated for lymphoma (\>80%) will achieve complete
remission. Cures, however, are rare and pets relapse and die of their
disease. The cause of this relapse is the presence of residual malignant
cells that eventually grow and become clinically detectable. With the
advent of more sensitive molecular techniques the measurement of minimal
residual disease (MRD) could be incorporated into clinical case
management to optimize treatment strategies; improve patient outcome,
and to gain additional insight into the basic biology of lymphoma.

To date serial blood samples from 68 canine patients with lymphoma
undergoing treatment taken at a variety of time points have been
collected. Concerning follow up of those patients, 56 have died of their
lymphoma, 3 have died of other non-cancer causes. Nine patients are
still alive as of 9/26/11. Of those 9, 4 had come out of remission and
completed sample collection, 5 are still in remission but we have
stopped sample collection in those patients. A total of 555 samples have
been collected from these 68 patients with an average number of samples
per patient of 8. Immunophenotype and treatment characteristics of these
68 patients are as follows; 50 are B cell, 16 are T cell, one has both
markers, and one is pending. From a treatment standpoint, 37 dogs
received a multiple drug chemotherapy protocol (35= CHOP, 2 COP), 26
received doxorubicin single agent therapy, and 5 received
investigational drugs as part of a clinical trial. Extraction of DNA,
development of patient specific primers, and analysis of quantitative
MRD is ongoing.

All patient information has been collected and complied at this point
and will be correlated with molecular assay results when they become
available. With this information we will answer the following questions:
Does the level of molecular disease burden at the time of diagnosis and
at the end of chemotherapy (i.e. the magnitude of decrease) correlate
with remission length and overall survival. We hypothesize that it will.

**_Publication information from the AKCCHF.org website:_**

"As previously reported a summer research student was supported on this
project and presented his work as a poster at the Merck Merial Summer
Student Symposium in August 2009. Gilbert DM, Avery AC, Burnet RC, Lana
SE. Merck Merial summer student symposium, Raleigh North Carolina,
August 2009. *Measurement of minimal residual disease using real time
PCR in canine lymphoma*. Another poster with updated information was
presented by a Hughes Undergraduate research student (Elizabeth Moses)
at the Colorado State University Undergraduate Research Fair in April 2011. Ms Moses won an honorable mention award for her poster. We
anticipate that final data will be available for presentation in the
Research Report format at the 2012 ACVIM Forum in New Orleans, LA."
