---
title: "AKCCHF grant #00615B (closed)"
layout: single
---

**Jaime F Modiano, VMD PhD, \[\$2500 from AKCCHF Donor Advised fund\]**

This is an AKCCHF Success Story! [Sniffing Out Lymphoma
Genes](http://www.akcchf.org/research/research-portfolio/0706.html)

**_Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:_**

"We showed recently that the breed-specific risk of lymphoma extends
beyond the simple disease condition to a predisposition for specific
forms of lymphoma. More importantly, we showed there are recurrent
chromosomal abnormalities that segregate with specific forms of lymphoma
and that are more common in Golden Retrievers (with that form of the
disease) than in other breeds, suggesting breed-specific profiles of
genetic abnormalities exist in canine lymphoma.

To continue this work, we have used contemporary "array-based"
technologies to identify genes that map to these regions and how they
contribute to the disease. The results from these analysis are in many
ways comforting, as they show differences that are proportional to what
would be expected based on the known biology of lymphoma. In other
words, tumors differ more based on phenotype (B-cell vs. T-cell) than
they do based on histologic grade. Also, T-cell malignancies harbor more
differences among them than B-cell malignancies. The data show that
breed specific changes extend to age of onset for lymphoma, providing
additional support for the central hypothesis, and we have identified
preliminary regions in two chromosomes where gene expression signatures
follow the same pattern of segregation for the gains and losses of DNA
we identified previously. Nevertheless, gene expression differences are
subtle, and in the case of breed and gender, they are few in number.
This is a remarkable result, since these small differences may define
genes and pathways that are heavily involved in risk and progression of
the disease in specific breeds. We predict that the results from this
work will allow us to define how heritable factors influence the
phenotype and biological behavior of these tumors, setting the
groundwork to develop better strategies for diagnosis, control, and
treatment."

**Publication:**

Thomas R et al. [Refining tumor-associated aneuploidy through "genomic
recoding" of recurrent DNA copy number aberrations in 150 canine
non-Hodgkin
lymphomas](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3109/10428194.2011.559802). 2011. Leukemia & Lymphoma 52: 1321-1335.
