---
title: "AKCCHF grant #01782 (open)"
layout: single
---

**Defining the Elements of Successful Cranial Cruciate Ligament Repair**

**Gina Bertocci, PhD, University of Louisville**

**_Update:  [Research Progress Report Summary Mid-Year 2, 6/30/2014](</files/AKCCHF 01782 MY2 Summary.pdf>)_**

**_Update:  [Final summary Report 6/30/2015](</files/AKCCHF grant 01782 FINAL Summary.pdf>)_**

**_Project Summary from the AKCCHF.org website:_**

"Cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL) deficiency affects the canine stifle
and is one of the most common orthopedic problems in dogs, having an
economic impact of more than \$1 billion in the US and a prevalence of
2.55% across all breeds of dogs. Some breeds have exceedingly high rates
of CrCL deficiency, with Newfoundlands (8.9%), Rottweilers (8.3%), and
Labrador Retrievers (5.8%) having the greatest prevalence of disease.
Surgical intervention is the treatment of choice to stabilize the
CrCL-deficient stifle, but no single surgical procedure has been shown
to conclusively provide long-term joint stability and prevent the
development of osteoarthritis.

Dr. Bertocci proposes to investigate commonly employed surgical
procedures (tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, tibial tuberosity
advancement and extra-capsular stabilization) using her previously
developed canine pelvic limb 3D computer model to gain an improved
understanding of stifle biomechanics following CrCL-deficient stifle
stabilization. She and her research team will investigate parameters
specific to each surgical procedure using their novel computer model to
further our understanding of stifle stabilization. Furthermore, they
will investigate anatomical characteristics (e.g. tibial plateau angle)
to gain an improved understanding of their role in the efficacy of
surgical intervention. The outcome of this study will be a
biomechanical, evidence-based assessment of the currently used stifle
stabilization surgical procedures."

**Publications:**

Brown NP, Bertocci GE, Marcellin-Little DJ.  [Development of a canine
stifle coputer model to evaluate cranial cruciate ligament
deficiency. ](http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0219519413500437?queryID=%24%7BresultBean.queryID%7D)Journal
of Mechanics in Medicine and Biology 2013; 13(3): 1350043-1350071.

Brown NP, Bertocci GE, Marcellin-Little DJ.  [Evaluation of varying
morphological parameters on the biomechanics of a cranial cruciate
ligament-deficient or intact canine stifle joint with a computer
simulation model.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24370242) 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 2014; 75(1): 26-33.

Brown NP, Bertocci GE, Marcellin-Little DJ.  [Canine stifle joint
biomechanics associated with tibial plateau leveling osteotomy predicted
by use of a computer
model.](http://avmajournals.avma.org/doi/abs/10.2460/ajvr.75.7.626) 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 2014; 75(7):  626-632.
