---
title: "AKCCHF Grant #02128-A (Closed)"
layout: single
---

**Jason Stull, VMD, PhD, Ohio State University, Principal Investigator**

**Update:** [Final Report 10/31/2016](</files/AKCCHF grant 02128A MY2 Summary.pdf>)

**Update:** [Research Progress Report Summary Mid-Year 2, 2/28/2016](</files/AKCCHF 02128-A EY2 FINAL Summary.pdf>)

**Abstract from AKCCHF.org website:**

Collaborative Project with the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals The AKC
Canine Health Foundation and the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals have
a long standing commitment to supporting research that aims to prevent,
treat, and cure canine disease. As the sport of dogs increases in
popularity, we realized that one major gap in our current body of
knowledge is how to reduce the risk of infectious disease spread at the
intersection of the dog and the environment. Put another way, now that
more and more large groups of dogs congregate at dog shows, agility
events, field trials, animal shelters and dog parks, where are the risks
and how should we manage them? To that end, Dr. Jason Stull and
colleagues at the Ohio State University and Ontario Veterinary College
will conduct a retrospective analysis of the veterinary infectious
disease literature in order to provide updated recommendations for
mitigation of risk of contraction of infectious disease at events where
dogs congregate. Led by Dr. Stull, this influential collaborative group
of veterinary epidemiologists, infectious disease experts,
immunologists, and internal medicine specialists will evaluate peer
reviewed studies defining the incidence, clinical presentations, and
outcomes of diseases; mechanism of infection, replication, spread and/or
pathogenesis of diseases, computer modeling of disease transmission,
characterization of susceptible cohorts for particular pathogens, and
emerging concerns for novel pathogens to assess risk and develop
management strategies. They will also include major stakeholders within
the dog community in the process, guaranteeing that recommendations made
at the outcome of this study will be practical and possible to
accomplish in the real world. The end result will be a peer-reviewed
publication defining an up-to-date risk assessment and management
recommendations, and most importantly, a white paper that can be used by
dog owners and organizers of canine events and facilities. Finally, the
researchers hope to create an open-access website that will be an
interactive, living document, helping all those involved with dogs
reduce the risk and spread of infectious disease where dogs meet and
compete.

**Research Team:**

Jason W. Stull, VMD, MPVM, PhD, DACVPM (Public Health, Epidemiology),
Principal Investigator Armando Hoet, DVM, PhD, DACVPM (Public Health,
Epidemiology) Jeanette O'Quin, DVM, MPH (Public Health, Epidemiology)
Mary Jo Burkhard, DVM, PhD, DACVP (Immunology/Infectious Disease,
Clinical Pathology) Michelle Evason, DVM, DACVIM (Internal Medicine) J.
Scott Weese, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Infectious Disease, Internal Medicine)

[AKCCHF.org 02128-A](http://www.akcchf.org/research/research-portfolio/2128.html)
