---
title: "AKCCHF grant #01064-A"
layout: single
---

**Investigator:** Douglas H Thamm, VMD, Colorado State University

_Note:_ Some of this work on Survivin is also applicable to
Osteosarcoma, as described in this AKCCHF Success Story: [Survivin' Canine Osteosarcoma](http://www.akcchf.org/research/impact-stories/survivin-canine-osteosarcoma.html)

**Update \[[Final Report](</files/1064-A MY2 FINAL Summary.pdf>)]**

**_Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:_**

"Survivin is a protein found within many cancer cells that can function
to prevent cancer cells from being killed by chemotherapy. These
researchers recently published data describing methods for measuring
survivin in canine lymphoma and found that dogs with low levels of
survivin lived longer than those dogs that expressed high levels of
survivin. The problem with the previous study is that in order to
analyze survivin expression, all dogs needed to undergo a lymph node
excision that required anesthesia and surgical removal of a lymph node.
One purpose of this study was to determine whether survivin expression
could be measured using less invasive techniques such as a fine needle
aspirate, which can be done without surgery.

The project collected and stained 20 planned samples, and evaluated
corresponding tissue blocks, and determined that the smearing technique
routinely used for evaluation of fine-needle aspirates was not suitable
for the evaluation of survivin levels. The researchers will be
evaluating an alternate cell preparation technique in the coming months
beyond the scope of the original grant, at no additional cost to AKCCHF.

The second purpose of this study was to molecularly interfere with
survivin levels in canine lymphoma cells that can be grown in the
laboratory, in order to test whether these lymphoma cells are more
easily killed. Despite numerous attempts to decrease survivin production
from the canine lymphoma cells, it was only modestly decreased in either
cell line (<50%). This degree of survivin reduction was not able to
increase cell death.

The researchers are planning to evaluate 2 alternative strategies for
survivin inhibition, including a more potent method of gene knockdown,
as well as a drug that has been recently shown to inhibit survivin
production. These investigations, which are beyond the scope of the
original project, will be completed in the coming months, also at no
additional cost to AKCCHF."

**Publications:**

Shoeneman JK, Ehrhart III EJ, Eickhoff JC, Charles JB, Powers BE, ThamM
DH. [Expression and Function of Survivin in Canine
Osteosarcoma.](https://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article/72/1/249/575897/Expression-and-Function-of-Survivin-in-Canine) 2011. Cancer Res 72: 249-259.

Rebhun RB, Lana SE, Ehrheart EJ, Thamm DH. [Comparative analysis of
surviving expression in untreated and relapsed canine
lymphoma.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18647159) 2008. J Vet
Intern Med 22: 989-995.
