---
title: "AKCCHF grant #00763 (closed)"
layout: single
---

**David Wilkie DVM, Ohio State University**

**Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:**

"The study \"Capsular tension ring effect on canine lens epithelial
migration and post-operative lens capsule opacification\" is a two-part
study looking at the behavior of lens epithelial cells (LEC) and lens
capsule scarring in response to capsular tension ring (CTR) placement
during cataract surgery. 100% of dogs undergoing cataract surgery
develop some degree of capsule scarring due to LEC proliferation and
migration. There are multiple ways capsule scarring may be treated or
prevented in humans, however to date, there is not an effective approved
method of preventing or eliminating capsule scarring in the canine
population undergoing cataract surgery. Rarely, the capsule scarring may
be opaque enough to obstruct a dog's vision completely and the goal of
this study is to provide a mechanism to improve the degree of capsule
scarring.

The first part of the study involved comparing the effect of CTR with
synthetic lens (IOL) implantation in a \"sham cataract surgery\" setting
in the laboratory. Lens epithelial cells were cultured on lens capsules
containing CTR, IOL, and a combination of both CTR/IOL. The degree of
LEC proliferation and migration (capsule scarring) was compared at
different time points of cell culture. The results show that lens
capsules containing both CTR and IOL showed a lesser degree of LEC
proliferation and migration in a laboratory setting. This correlates
with findings in human medical literature on CTR effects.

The second part of the study involves a clinical trial with CTR
implantation in clinical patients. This study is currently in progress
with a majority of the necessary client-owned dogs enrolled as far out
as 12 months post-cataract surgery. Half of the eyes enrolled receive
CTRs and half serve as control eyes. Photos are taken of the lens
capsules at all recheck appointments, and the degree of capsule scarring
is evaluated by a software program to eliminate subjectivity. In April
2008, preliminary statistical analysis was completed on clinical trial
data at time points 2 weeks, 2 months, and 4 months. The preliminary
statistics showed that eyes receiving CTRs had statistically less PCO at
2 months post-operatively and non-diabetic dogs receiving CTRs had
statistically less PCO at 4 months post-operatively. In May 2009,
complete statistical analysis of the findings will determine the
significance of the capsular scarring difference between control eyes
and eyes receiving CTRs. This data will be submitted in manuscript form
for publication to Journal of Cataract and Refractive Surgery. Our
clinical impression is that the CTR will statistically significantly
decrease PCO by 12 months post-cataract surgery as 1) we are seeing some
difference with the preliminary statistics and 2) subjectively in the
clinic we are able to discern which eye has received the CTR by the
smaller amount of scarring despite being blinded prior to the ophthalmic
examination.

The significance of this research involves improving overall vision
postoperatively in canine cataract patients. Different biomaterial
types, lens implant designs, drugs, and other methods have been
researched to improve the incidence of lens capsule scarring. This
research has more historically been looked at in humans and rabbits. The
CTR has shown statistically significant improvement in the incidence of
human capsule scarring post-operatively. This research project will
determine if CTRs have the same effect in canine lens capsules
post-cataract surgery."

**Publication:**

Wilkie DA, Colitz CM. [Update on veterinary cataract
surgery](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19077830).  2009.  Curr Opin
Ophthalmol. Jan;20(1):61-8.
