---
title: "AKCCHF Grant #02146-A (closed)"
layout: single
---

**Heather Chandler, PhD, Ohio State University**

**Update!  [Final Summary Report](</files/AKCCHF 02146-A FINAL Summary.pdf>)**

**Abstract from AKCCHF.org website:  **\
Cataracts are the most common cause of treatable blindness in dogs.
Surgery is the only way to restore normal vision and although every
effort is made to remove as much lens material as possible during
cataract surgery, it is inevitable that some lens cells are left behind
within the eye. These lens cells will move and multiply, resulting in
the most common complication to cataract surgery, posterior capsule
opacification (PCO). PCO interferes with light transmission and results
in secondary vision loss in 80-100% of canine cataract patients.
Unfortunately, there is no consistently effective treatment for PCO.
Studies performed in laboratory animals have found that use of a
commonly prescribed drug, Cyclosporine, can decrease PCO formation. Dr.
Chandler believes that Cyclosporine may provide a safe, cost-effective
and reliable option to prevent PCO. Using a laboratory animal model
system, Dr. Chandler will evaluate the effectiveness of a novel
gel-based drug delivery polymer to release Cyclosporine at the correct
dose and time needed to prevent PCO. Post-cataract surgery, eyes will be
treated with the delivery device releasing Cyclosporine while other eyes
will be treated with the delivery device and no Cyclosporine. Dr.
Chandler expects that her novel drug delivery gel will be able to
release Cyclosporine for at least one week at the correct dose to
prevent PCO. If successful, future studies will focus on incorporating
Cyclosporine drug delivery in canine clinical trials, potentially
providing ophthalmologists a new method of restoring and maintaining
excellent vision in dogs that have been blinded by cataracts.

[AKCCHF.org
02146-A](http://www.akcchf.org/research/research-portfolio/2146.html)
