+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #01494-A (open)"
+++

***Identifying the cause of drug resistance in canine lymphoma.***

**Bonnie L Boudreaux, DVM, Louisiana State UniversityÂ **\[\$1000 from
AKCCHF donor advised fund\]

***Abstract from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Development of multidrug resistance is a major obstacle in the adequate
treatment of both human and veterinary cancer patients with
chemotherapy. Development of resistance has been linked to the
expression of a protein, P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Increased levels of P-gp
expression have been documented in patients at the time of tumor relapse
and are thought to be a primary reason for chemotherapeutic failure.

The goal of this study is to compare the level of P-gp expression in
lymphocytes found in different lymph nodes and peripheral blood in
lymphoma patients using flow cytometry. Dr. Boudreaux believes that
lymphocyte expression in the peripheral blood will directly correlate
with that in lymph node lymphocytes and that there will not be variation
amongst the lymph nodes in a given patient. Additional objectives would
be to follow fifty canine lymphoma patients throughout their
chemotherapy protocols to evaluate the changes in the level of P-gp
expression over time in blood lymphocytes and at relapse to determine if
there is a threshold of P-gp expression that develops prior to an
individual relapsing.

If their hypothesis is accurate, the chemotherapeutic management of
patients could be drastically altered, with significant emphasis put on
levels of P-gp expression as a clinically relevant prognostic factor.
Additional information regarding the level of P-gp expression relative
to individual patient demographics will be analyzed for significance."
