
AKCCHF grant \#01484 (closed) ---  Samoyed Club of America Education and Research Foundation (SCARF)
===================================================================================================

**Nicola J Mason, BVetMed, PhD, University of Pennsylvania\[\$2500\]**

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"In this proposal we set out to utilize our canine-derived scFv phage
display platform technology to isolate canine antibody fragments that
bind and neutralize Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF). VEGF is a
protein growth factor that promotes the growth and survival of new blood
vessels. Tumors require the growth of new blood vessels to supply them
with oxygen and nutrients that allow the tumor to grow. VEGF is a major
contributor to this angiogenesis (growth of new blood vessels).
Bevacizumab (Avastin) is a humanized antibody that recognizes and
neutralizes human VEGF. It is currently approved for the treatment of a
number of different cancers including metastatic colon cancer, and
non-small cell lung cancer. FDA approval and on-going clinical trials
attest to the potential of VEGF inhibition as a treatment for many
different cancer types in humans, however, the therapeutic effects of
VEGF neutralization on cancer growth and metastasis have not been
evaluated in the dog. Expression of VEGF has been reported in a wide
range of different tumor types in the dog including hemangiosarcoma,
malignant melanoma, soft tissue sarcomas, mast cell tumors, nasal
carcinomas, intracranial neoplasias, and simple mammary gland
adenocarcinomas and inflammatory mammary carcinoma. Serum levels of VEGF
are increased in dogs with osteosarcoma, malignant melanoma and HSA and
in dogs with osteosarcoma and malignant melanoma, serum levels correlate
with disease free interval and survival times respectively. Together
these reports suggest that VEGF plays an important role in the
progression of these tumor types in the dog and as such represents a
potential therapeutic target. However, to date there are no
canine-derived antibodies that bind and neutralize the angiogenic
activity of canine VEGF.

During this project, we identified 3 canine-derived scFv or antibody
fragments that bind to canine VEGF. Furthermore results from cell-based
assays in vitro suggest that these antibody fragments might inhibit the
growth stimulating effects of VEGF on healthy endothelial cells and on a
canine hemangiosarcoma cell line in vitro. These results suggest that
not only do these antibody fragments bind VEGF but they also might
inhibit its biological activity, which would be essential for any
therapeutic effect. We have since developed several sophisticated
techniques including surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to more closely
interrogate the ability of our isolated antibody fragments to neutralize
the activity of VEGF (i.e. inhibit the ability of VEGF to interact with
a key VEGF receptor). Disappointingly, the results of these experiments
have shown that the most abundant antibody fragment that we isolated
from our library does not appear to affect the interaction of VEGF with
its receptor suggesting that this clone would not inhibit the biological
effects of VEGF on tumor blood vessels. However, we are now testing the
remaining 2 isolated scFv using these advanced techniques to determine
whether they can neutralize VEGF.

In summary, this work has 1) demonstrated that canine derived antibody
fragments that bind to VEGF can be isolated from libraries using simple
panning techniques; and 2) optimized sophisticated techniques (surface
plasmon resonance) that we can now use to determine whether antibody
fragments interact with molecules of interest and can inhibit particular
molecular interactions in vitro prior to their translation into patients
with diseases such as hemangiosarcoma. We will continue to utilize these
techniques to evaluate the remaining 2 scFv. If we find that one or both
of these scFv neutralize VEGF activity then we intend to identify
commercial partners that will assist in generating canine monoclonal
antibodies based on these scFv that could then enter clinical trials in
patients with hemangiosarcoma or other tumor types that are associated
with excess production of VEGF."
