+++
title = "AKCCHF Grant #00972 (closed)"
+++

**Grant \#00972**: Identification of Mutations Associated with
Hereditary Cataracts in Northern Breeds

**Principal Investigator**: Dr. Cathryn Mellersh, Ph.D.

**Research Institution**: Animal Health Trust

**Original Project Description:**

**Background:** Hereditary cataracts (HC) are a leading cause of
blindness in dogs and thus represent a significant health and welfare
burden to many breeds of dog. The work outlined in this proposal aims to
identify the genetic cause of HC in Northern breeds, a closely related
group of breeds that collectively suffer a high incidence of HC.

**Objective:** A successful outcome of the project will enable the
researchers to develop diagnostic DNA tests that breeders can use to
determine whether their dogs are affected with HC and whether they will
pass the condition onto their offspring. DNA tests enable carrier and
even affected dogs to be safely bred from, if they are good examples of
their breed and they are only mated to dogs that have tested clear of
HC, thus keeping their valuable genes in the population without risking
the production of affected offspring.

Original Grant Objectives**:**

Objective 1: Increase the numbers of samples to at least 20 cases and 20
controls for 13 Northern breeds.

Objective 2: Genotype the cases and controls of each breed with
microsatellites closely linked to approximately 25 genes candidate genes
known to be associated with inherited forms of cataract in humans, to
identify any that are linked to HC in the dog.

Objective 3: Genotype 40 samples (20 cases and 20 controls) for two
breeds, the Siberian Husky and the Samoyed, with high-density SNP
(single nucleotide polymorphism) arrays and carry out linkage or
association analysis to identify genomic regions associated with HC in
each breed.

Objective 4: Genotype SNPs from associated region(s) in cases and
controls of other Northern breeds, to determine whether cases from all
breeds share a common haplotype, which would indicate a single mutation
is likely responsible for HC in all Northern breeds (linkage
disequilibrium mapping).

Objective 5: Sequence candidate genes within the HC critical region to
identify causal mutation(s).

Objective 6: Investigate other, non-Northern breeds with HC to identify
any that share causal mutations identified during this project.

Objective 7: Develop diagnostic DNA test which will be offered to
breeders.

**Final Report Project Summary:**

This study aimed to investigate the genetic cause of hereditary cataract
(HC) in Northern breeds. The Investigators have collected samples from
228 dogs affected with bilateral cataract (both eyes) and 300 dogs with
a clear eye examination from 15 Northern breeds, initially screening
known human cataract-causing genes in 66 dogs from two of these breeds.
They used a panel of 39 markers near to 20 genes involved in human
inherited cataract and found no evidence for association of any markers
with HC in the two breeds. Using genome-wide association (GWA) study
(whole genome scanning) approaches they conducted an initial analysis of
HC in the Finnish Lapphund, Icelandic Sheepdog, Samoyed and Siberian
Husky. For the Samoyed they found evidence for an association with HC on
chromosome 7, but no associations were identified in the other three
breeds.

These initial results suggested that HC in Northern breeds is not caused
by a single gene mutation and may have a more complex genetic
background. This finding is not entirely surprising when it is
considered that to date only a single gene, HSF4, has been implicated in
the development of HC in the dog despite the fact that close to 100
breeds are known to be affected by the condition.

To detect mutations in numerous genes requires analysis of a larger
number of samples using a rigorous definition for affected dogs
(\'cases\') and unaffected dogs (\'controls\'). Therefore for their
final investigation they concentrated their efforts on four breeds that
display a clinically similar form of HC and for which we have sufficient
numbers of cases and controls for analysis. They have conducted a GWA
scan of HC in these four breeds-the Alaskan Malamute, Siberian Husky,
Karelian Bear Dog and Samoyed-using an updated high-density genome
scanning array comprising around 174,000 markers spanning the DNA. Their
initial analyses of these data are promising and they have found
evidence of HC-associated regions for at least three of the breeds. The
Investigators are currently investigating these association signals and
aim to design and conduct further studies to attempt to pinpoint the
causal mutations.
