+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #00366"
+++

> **Update:** This research study is complete.  Samples are no longer required.

# Molecular Control of COX-2 Expression and Regulation of Prostaglandin Transport in Canine Mammary Tumors

**Monique Dore, DVM PhD, University of Montreal.**

Mammary Cancer Research to benefit dogs and humans!  This is an
extension of the [previous study (AKCCHF\#02222)](/research/current-studies/akcchf-grant-02222) on
the connection between elevated levels of the COX-2 enzyme and the
development of mammary tumors.  So far, Doré's research has shown
"that COX-2 was not expressed in the normal (mammary) gland but was
detected in 24% of adenomas and in 56% of adenocarcinomas (P < 0.001)."

**Sponsor:**

Samoyed Club of America Education & Research Foundation, Inc.

**Researcher:**

Dr. Monique Doré, DVM, MSc, PhD, Dipl. ACVP

Université de Montréal

"*I thank you very much for your precious help with this research.*"
from Monique Doré, DVM, MSc, PhD, Dipl. ACVP



**Abstract from the AKCCHF.org website:**

"Tumors originating from the mammary gland represent one of the most
frequent forms of cancer in female dogs. However, very little
information is known about the mechanisms involved in the development of
this cancer. In dogs, the growth of mammary tumors can recur following
surgical excision or cancerous cells can appear in distant organs.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), an enzyme that is essential in the production
of prostaglandins, has been implicated in various forms of cancer in
humans, including breast cancer. We have recently reported for the first
time that COX-2 is induced in the majority of canine malignant mammary
tumors. The objective of this proposal is to study the molecular
mechanisms involved in the regulation of COX-2 gene expression in canine
mammary tumors. We will also characterize the expression of a novel
prostaglandin transporter in these tumors. It is expected that a better
comprehension of the mechanisms involved in COX-2 expression and
prostaglandin transport in canine mammary cancer will help design new
strategies for cancer therapy and prevention in dogs."



Read all about this exciting research in Dr. Doré's publications that
were supported by AKCCHF grants #02222 and #00366:

Dore M et al.  [Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression in Canine Mammary
Tumors](http://vet.sagepub.com/content/40/2/207.full).  2003.
Veterinary Pathology 40:  207-212.



Brunell M, Sartin EA, Wolfe LG, Sirois J & Dore M.  [Cyclooxygenase-2
Expression in Normal and Neoplastic Canine Mammary Cell
Lines](http://vet.sagepub.com/content/43/5/656.long).  2006.  Veterinary
Pathology 43:656-666.



Dore M.  [Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression in Animal
Cancers](http://vet.sagepub.com/content/48/1/254.long).  2011.
Veterinary Pathology 48:254-265.

