+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #01227-A (closed)"
+++

### Specificity and Sensitivity of the Pancreatic Lipase Immunoreactivity (SPEC cPL) Test for the Diagnosis of Canine Pancreatitis

Stanley L Marks, BVSc, PhD, University of California Davis

**This is an AKCCHF Success Story!  [Diagnosing Pancreatitis before
It's Too
Late](http://www.akcchf.org/research/success-stories/diagnosing-pancreatitis.html)**

**2/28/2010:  Report to Grant Sponsor from Investigator**

*Pancreatitis is a common and debilitating disease in dogs. The
non-invasive diagnosis of canine pancreatitis remains challenging
despite the advent of abdominal ultrasound and pancreas-specific blood
tests. The pancreas-lipase immunoreactivity blood test was recently
modified to address these concerns; however, the interpretation of
abnormal pancreas-lipase test results in the absence of other supportive
signs or diagnostic tests remains problematic. *

*We recently completed a study in 70 dogs in which the severity of
pancreatic inflammation observed during routine necropsies was compared
with the pancreas-lipase test. Our study showed that the sensitivity
(finding of an abnormal test in a dog with pancreatic inflammation)
varied depending on the type of pancreatic inflammation, with the
highest sensitivity results observed in dogs with acute pancreatitis.
However, the sensitivity of the pancreas-lipase test was significantly
decreased in dogs with chronic pancreatitis in which the sensitivity of
the pancreas-lipase test was only 50%. The specificity of the
pancreas-lipase test (finding of a normal test in a dog without
pancreatic inflammation) was quite high at 80%. *

*Our study confirmed that the pancreas-lipase test is superior to other
blood tests for the diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs. Our study
emphasizes the need to establish other blood tests that have better
sensitivities, particularly for dogs with chronic pancreatitis.*

**Publication:**

Trivedi S, Marks S, Kass P, Luff J, Keller S, Johnson E and Murphy B.
(2011), [Sensitivity and Specificity of Canine Pancreas-Specific Lipase
(cPL) and Other Markers for Pancreatitis in 70 Dogs with and without
Histopathologic Evidence of
Pancreatitis.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22092611) Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 25: 1241--1247
