+++
title = "AKCCHF grant#01670-A Abstract"
+++

**AKCCHF grant \#01670-A:** Pinpointing the causal mutation(s)
underlying a genome-wide association signal for hereditary cataract in
Northern breeds\
Grant Status: Closed\
Grant Amount: \$12,960.  SCARF contributed \$2000.\
Dr. Sally L Ricketts, PhD, Animal Health Trust

Sponsor(s): Alaskan Malamute Club of America, Inc.\
Breed(s): Alaskan Malamute, Samoyed, Siberian Husky\
Disease(s): Cataracts

**Abstract:**

This study aims to pinpoint precisely causal mutations for hereditary
cataract (HC) in Northern, or Arctic, breeds. It follows on from our
recent investigations in which we have found a region of the genome on
canine chromosome 18 that shows genome-wide statistical association with
HC in the Siberian Husky, and we also have evidence that the same
associated region is relevant in the Alaskan Malamute and Samoyed. As
the region spans approximately 6.5 million letters of the DNA code and
encompasses over 100 genes, we will use new molecular sequencing
technologies to search this sequence for mutations in 10 Siberian
Huskies (five HC-affected dogs and five clear dogs). We will assess any
novel mutations that we identify in a set of over 200 Siberian Huskies
to determine the frequency of the mutations and to assess their specific
effect on risk of HC. We will then assess whether the Siberian Husky HC
causal mutations are also present in the Alaskan Malamute and Samoyed.
We expect to find at least one causal mutation for HC that will be
relevant in at least these three breeds, but due to the close ancestral
relationship among Northern breeds it is likely that mutations will also
be shared with additional breeds. Our results will be used to develop a
predictive and diagnostic tool for owners, breeders and veterinarians
that will identify dogs at increased risk of developing HC, thus
enabling better informed breeding decisions to be made to avoid
producing clinically affected dogs.

**Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:**

"We have conducted a study to resequence a region of the genome on
canine chromosome 18 that we previously found to be statistically
associated with hereditary cataract (HC) in Northern, or Arctic, breeds
in a genome-wide association study, in order to identify causative
mutation(s) for HC in these breeds. We defined HC in these breeds as
dogs with cataracts in both eyes located within the posterior polar
subcapsular region of the lens. We have used molecular targeted
sequencing technology to obtain data for approximately 3.8 million
letters of DNA spanning the HC-associated region of the genome in ten
Siberian Huskies (five HC cases and five control dogs with clear eyes
over the age of 6 years). In this dataset we found over 35,000 variants
among the ten dogs and the Boxer reference genome sequence. We devised a
computer program to examine the segregation of each variant with HC
using both a dominant and recessive genetic model and we found 200
variants that showed perfect segregation with HC in our ten dogs. We
excluded variants where the potential \'risk\' allele was the same as
the Boxer reference genome sequence, as it is unlikely that these would
represent causal mutations. This left us with 78 variants that we
checked manually against online databases to assess which were within,
or very close to, gene coding regions. This confirmed that ten variants
were located in gene coding regions. Two of these coding variants were
predicted to cause a change in the protein sequence of the gene and were
found to be potentially damaging to protein function by analysis of
online databases. Futhermore, the non-risk allele was highly conserved
among many different animal species, which is additional evidence to
suggest that it is important for normal function of the protein. We
assessed these two variants in 200 Siberian Huskies, 200 Alaskan
Malamutes and 130 Samoyeds and found that one of the variants showed
strong statistical association with HC in two of the breeds. However,
this variant is very common in both dogs with HC and in older dogs with
clear eyes, and doesn\'t completely account for HC in our samples. It
may be that this is a susceptibility variant and there is an
environmental component to HC that affects how the genetic
susceptibility is expressed, however, before we explore this possibility
we are continuing with our analysis of the resequencing data to ensure
we have completed a fully comprehensive investigation of the region."
