+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #01139 (closed)"
+++

**Nicola J Mason, BVetMed, PhD, University of Pennsylvania**

This is an AKCCHF success story:  [Using Technology to Target
Tumors ](http://www.akcchf.org/research/success-stories/using-technology-to-target.html)

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Canine hemangiosarcoma is a common and highly aggressive tumor of blood
vessels that is oftentimes fatal. At diagnosis most dogs have evidence
of metastatic disease and despite chemotherapy, survival times rarely
exceed 6 months. Novel approaches to the treatment of this disease are
needed.

Our work supported by CHF and its associated breed clubs aimed to
generate a platform technology for generating canine-derived antibody
fragments that can be utilized in vivo to specifically target tumor
cells or their growth factors that are necessary for tumor cell
proliferation and survival. Antibody fragments that target tumor cells
can be linked to toxic agents and used to deliver these drugs directly
to a cancer cell allowing for increased drug delivery and reduced toxic
side effects. Antibody fragments that target growth factors aim to
neutralize the effects of these factors on the tumor and so inhibit
tumor growth and survival. These antibody fragments do not require
linkage to toxic entities to exert their effects. Although antibody
targeting approaches have revolutionized the treatment of certain
cancers the in human clinics, no such targeting systems are currently
available for use in the dog. Antibodies utilized in the human clinics
are not used in veterinary medicine because they are not canine in
origin so will be rapidly rejected by the dog\'s immune system.
Furthemore, these antibodies may not cross-react with canine tumor
molecules so will be ineffective in the canine system.

The work performed during the first year lead to our ability to generate
libraries of synthetic, canine antibody fragments. Each fragment is
specific for a particular molecule. Such molecules may be those
expressed on the surface of cancer cells, molecules associated with
tumor growth factors or molecules expressed on the surface of infectious
agents. Indeed, in theory, any molecule may be recognized by one or more
antibody fragments contained within our canine antibody fragment
libraries.

Having generated these libraries we then aimed to use techniques to
isolate fragments that specifically bind to canine hemangiosarcoma cells
and canine Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF). We were not
successful in isolating scFv fragments against tumor associated antigens
hypothesized to be expressed by hemangiosarcoma cell lines. Therefore,
we opted to focus efforts on selecting antibody fragments that bind the
known and bona fide endothelial cell growth factor VEGF. This growth
factor plays an important role in ensuring that new blood vessels are
generated in response to the presence of the tumor. New blood vessels
support tumor growth and agents that inhibit VEGF are important in the
treatment of many different malignancies.

We have been successful in these efforts and have generated several
antibody fragments that bind to canine VEGF. We are currently testing
their ability to neutralize VEGF\'s effects on the growth of
hemangiosarcoma cells in vitro. Furthermore, we are now taking steps to
modify these fragments and generate canine monoclonal antibodies that
are likely to have more favourable pharmacokinetic properties. It is
important to note that since the antibody fragments we have generated
are replicas of canine antibody fragments they should elicit minimal
immune responses when used. As such, these antibody fragments should be
able to be administered multiple times if necessary, without loosing
their potency.

In summary, work supported by this AKC CHF grant has lead to the
development of the first canine-derived, antigen-specific targeting
approach that may be used for the treatment of many different cancer
types including HSA. Furthermore, we have isolated 3 unique canine
derived antibody fragments that bind to canine VEGF. Work now continues
to further develop these antibodies by evaluating their ability to
neutralize canine VEGF and generate monoclonal antibodies from their
sequences."

***Publication:***

Braganza, A, Wallace, K, Pell, L, Parrish, Cr, Siegel, Dl and Mason, NJ
(2011) [Generation and validation of canine single chain variable
fragment phage display
libraries. ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20817275)Veterinary
Immunology and Immunopathology. 139, 27-40.
