
AKCCHF grant \#01421 (closed) ---  Samoyed Club of America Education and Research Foundation (SCARF)
===================================================================================================

**Stephen A Kania, PhD, University of Tennessee \[\$2500\]**

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"The emergence of methicillin-resistant staphylococci has made the
treatment of canine skin infections with Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
a difficult challenge. In fact some of these bacteria are resistant to
all available antibiotics. There are many unanswered questions regarding
antibiotic resistance and the underlying causes of skin infections. In
addition, new strategies are needed to prevent and/or treat infections
from these organisms such as vaccines or bacteriophage therapy.

The foundation of these approaches rests on identification of the major
strains of the bacterial species. To attain this goal we developed a new
method of genetic tying and hundreds of bacterial isolates were obtained
from all regions of the United States. Each sample was studied with
regard to spectrum of antibiotic resistance and genetic background and
we have made significant progress toward identifying the entire genome
of the major strains of the bacterium. Using the latest technology,
genomes have been assembled from two isolates representing the major
clonal populations of S.pseudintermedius. We have nearly completed
assembling the genomes of three additional genomes and plan to assemble
a total of seven genomes.

This project has provided important new information by identifying all
of the thousands of genes contained within two isolates representing the
most frequently occurring type of the bacterium. This information is
being used to determine the role of the gene products in infection, to
identify new targets for vaccine development, and to better understand
the spread of antibiotic resistance between bacteria."

Publication:

Solyman SM, Black CC, Duim B, Perreten V, van Duijkeren E, Wagenaar JA,
Eberlein LC, Sadeghi LN,  Videla R, Bemis DA, and Kania SA. [Multilocus
Sequence Typing (MLST) for Characterization of Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3536184/) 
2013.   J. Clin. Microbiol. 51:306-310.
