+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #01272 (closed)"
+++

**Jorge A Piedrahita, PhD, North Carolina State University \[\$2500\]**

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Stem cells can make cell types as varied as neurons, heart cells, or
bone cells. This ability to make multiple cells makes them valuable for
clinical applications as they can replace damaged, or diseased cells.
Broadly, there are two types of stem cells, those that can be isolated
from embryos, or embryonic stem cells (ES), and those that can be
obtained from adults. ES cells can make many cell types but cannot
easily match the patient being treated as they can only be obtained from
embryos.  Adult stem cells can be matched to the patient, but they are
not as good as ES cells as they can only make some cell types.

Recently, in mice and humans, stem cells were isolated called induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPS). These stem cells can be made from easily
obtained skin or fat cells, yet they are as useful as ES cells. Their
development is a critical step toward the successful clinical
application of stem cells in dogs, so we proposed to develop canine iPS
using fat or skin cells, and to study them for their ability to make
multiple cell types in vitro.

With the funds provided we have been able to isolate four new canine iPS
cell lines and have maintained them for over 9 months in culture. These
cell lines express the appropriate makers of stem cells and can
differentiate into multiple tissues types in vitro and in vivo. We have
also examined whether the cell lines have a normal karyotype
(chromosomes) and found no evidence of abnormality. However, we have
found by more detailed genetic analysis that the cells become unstable
with prolonged culture. We have completed experiments to document how
and when the cell lines change and to see if we can find way of
preventing those changes. In short, we have successfully developed
canine iPS cell and have demonstrated that they can differentiate into
several tissue types in vitro and in vivo."

Publication:

Sehwon K et al.  [Growth Requirements and Chromosomal Instability of
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Generated from Adult Canine
Fibroblasts.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3585736/) 
2012.  Stem Cells and Development 22: 951-963
