
AKCCHF grant \#01637 (closed) ---  Samoyed Club of America Education and Research Foundation (SCARF)
===================================================================================================

**Identification of DNA Marker(s) for Cataracts in Purebred Dogs, with
Emphasis on the Breeds Alaskan Malamute, Siberian Husky, and Samoyed**

**Dr. Vilma Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan, PhD, Michigan State University**

The AKCCHF funded Dr. Vilma Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan, Dr. David Ramsey and Dr.
Simon Petersen-Jones at Michigan State University to do a study
entitled: Identification of DNA Marker(s) for Cataracts in Purebred
Dogs, with Emphasis on the Breeds Alaskan Malamute, Siberian Husky and
Samoyed in 1998. This study was completed in late 2001. The objectives
were to collect DNA, clinical information and pedigrees from
representatives of the three target breeds and then to evaluate mode of
inheritance and penetrance by age and clinical outcome. They planned to
evaluate linkage of microsatellite markers distributed throughout the
canine genome. If linked markers could be identified they would map them
on the available reference pedigrees. They hoped to be able to evaluate
candidate genes by sequencing the DNA of the parallel canine gene.

Their results support an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance in all
three breeds, indicating that affected dogs must receive a gene from
each parent. Their data supports a 'founder effect' for cataracts in
each breed. To try to find the genetic marker for the disease,
researchers did a genome-wide linkage analysis with microsatellite
markers in each breed. This work has eliminated large portions of the
genome for harboring the causative gene.Â  They believe that they were
able to identify one marker that is associated with juvenile cataracts
in one extensive Samoyed pedigree. Further studies that the group was
able to perform did not allow identification of any specific gene as the
likely candidate for cataracts in our breed.
