
AKCCHF grant \#01232-A (closed) ---  Samoyed Club of America Education and Research Foundation (SCARF)
=====================================================================================================

Nicola J Mason, BVetMed, PhD, University of Pennsylvania

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Multicentric lymphoma is the most common hematopoietic cancer in dogs
and is currently treated using a combination of chemotherapeutic agents,
which inhibit cell division and induce cell death. Over the past 30
years, many chemotherapeutic protocols have been used and most induce
remission in 65-96% of patients. However, regardless of induction
protocol, 85-90% of patients relapse with lethal, drug-resistant
lymphoma within 6 to 9 months of diagnosis.

In this work we have explored the hypothesis that persistent activation
of a major intracellular signaling pathway (the NF-KB pathway) occurs
within canine lymphoma cells and that this contributes to lymphoma by
driving the expression of genes that drive the tumor to proliferate,
resist cell death and develop resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs.

The results of this work have revealed that this important intracellular
pathway is constitutively active within the tumors of the majority of
dogs with the most common subtype of lymphoma, Diffuse Large B Cell
Lymphoma (DLBCL). Furthermore, we have shown that the activation of this
pathway correlates with increased expression of genes that promote
malignant cell proliferation and resistance to chemotherapy. We have
traced back the steps of activation of this pathway and have
demonstrated that constitutive activity originates at a point in the
signaling pathway that is proximal to a protein complex know as IkappaB
Kinase (IKK). From this work, we hypothesize that inhibition of this IKK
complex represents a novel targeted approach to treat the most common
subtype of canine lymphoma.

In additional studies we have utilized a selective inhibitor of the
NF-KB pathway, known as NBD peptide, to demonstrate that NF-KB
inhibition in canine malignant B cells leads to rapid cell death in the
laboratory. This preliminary data is being used to support a pilot
clinical trial in dogs with relapsed DLBCL to evaluate the safety and
efficacy of NBD peptide to inhibit the NF-KB pathway and to enhance
clinical response to chemotherapy either at the time of diagnosis and/or
during rescue therapy. We hypothesize that the use of a selective
inhibitor of the NF-KB pathway will act synergistically with standard
chemotherapeutic agents to enhance malignant cell death and improve
response rate and remission times in dogs with DLBCL."

**Publication:**

Gaurnier-Hausser A, Patel R, Baldwin AS, May MJ, Mason NJ.  [NEMO
Binding Domain peptide inhibits constitutive NF-kB activity and reduces
tumor burden in a canine model of relapsed, refractory Diffuse large
B-Cell
Lymphoma.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3273413/) 2011.  
Clin Cancer Res 17:  4661-4671.
