
AKCCHF grant \#01415 (closed) ---  Samoyed Club of America Education and Research Foundation (SCARF)
===================================================================================================

**Bruce Hammerberg, DVM PhD, North Carolina State University
\[\$2500\]**

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Project Summary

1\) To create a recombinant, non-anaphylactic, single-chain antibody
fragment (scFv) with high affinity for canine IgE from the variable
region gene sequences of mAb 5.91. The sequence for the light chain
variable region of mAb 5.91 was completed in April, 2011. The sequence
for the heavy chain variable region was completed in October, 2011.
Linkage of the two sequences and expression of a recombinant scFv of mAb
5.91 with confirmation of high affinity binding to canine IgE was
completed in November, 2011. A Fab fragment was produced from the whole
molecule mAb 5.91 and used in flow cytometry assays as a model for the
recombinant scFv version of the antibody by May, 2011. Whole blood from
allergic dogs was processed and assayed. Results showed that the whole
mAb 5.91 molecule reduced the amount of binding of canine IgE to the
monocyte cell population from 15% to 7.7%. Moreover, the intact mAb 5.91
was able to bind the free IgE to prevent it from binding cell surface
receptors. However, whole molecule mAb 5.91 complexed with canine IgE
bound to 13.7% of the lymphocyte cell population possibly reacting with
IgG Fc receptors. The Fab fragment of mAb 5.91, pre-incubated with
canine IgE, reduced the binding of canine IgE to the monocyte cell
population from 15% to 5.6%. This demonstrated that the Fab fragment of
mAb 5.91 was even more effective in reducing the binding of IgE to the
monocyte cell population than the intact mAb 5.91. There was no evidence
of Fab fragment complexed with canine IgE binding to lymphocytes as
previously seen with intact mAb 5.91. These preliminary results indicate
that the recombinant scFv form of the mAb 5.91 will be more effective at
blocking IgE binding to cell surface receptors as well as decreasing the
potential of cross reactivity of the lymphocyte cell population with the
IgG Fc receptors than the original mAb 5.91.

2\) To generate a plant-derived recombinant, nonanaphylactic, scFv with
high affinity for IgE that can be scaled up for production at kilogram
amounts. To be completed in the second year. Gene constructs of the
newly made 5.91-scFv were designed to target the chloroplast and ER
regions of the tobacco leaf cells. Both gene constructs were inserted
into a PVX pGR106 amplicon vector and amplified in E.coli. The purified
5.91scFv-pGR106 constructs are being used to transform Agrobacterium
tumefaciens strain GV3101. However, problems have been encountered
during transformation attempts of Agrobacterium tumefaciens with the
purified 5.91scFv-pGR106 constructs. A second round of transformation is
being performed at this time. TEV-B is a transgenic tobacco plant that
expresses a mutated P1/HC-Pro suppressor of Post Transcriptional Gene
Silencing. It has been shown that this line of tobacco plants produces
higher protein yields than wild type varieties of tobacco including
Nicotiana benthamiana. TEV-B seeds were planted on May 23rd and TEV-B
plants should be ready for infection in July. TEV-B plants were
Agroinfected with Agrobacterium tumefaciens GV3101 containing the gene
5.91scFv::chloro gene construct. Total protein was extracted from 2kg of
transgenic leaf tissue. Crude extract was clarified from photosynthetic
proteins and polyphenols that may interact with downstream applications.
Binding activity of the 5.91scFv in the extract was confirmed on ELISA
and was later compared to the activity of 5.91Fab and intact mAb 5.91 in
whole blood and canine mast cells flow cytometry assays."
