---
title: 'AKCCHF grant #01822 (closed)'
---
**Beyond the Genome: The Intersection of Genes and the Environment in
Canine Cancer**

**Robert K Wayne, PhD, University of California Los Angeles**

**Update! \[Final Report](/files/AKCCHF grant 1822 FINAL Summary.pdf)**

_**Project Summary from the AKCCHF.org website:**_

"Not all genes are active at all times. DNA methylation (the addition of
methyl groups to DNA) is one of several mechanisms that cells use to
control gene expression. Abnormal patterns of DNA methylation have been
observed in human cancer. However, methylation remains an unexplored
dimension of canine disease.

This seed grant to Dr. Wayne will allow him to establish the techniques
and methodologies necessary to define the pattern of normal variation in
methylomes (the genome-wide collection of methylated sites) from an
array-based analysis of a variety of domestic dog breeds. Differences in
methylation found between breed lineages will be complemented by the
study of gene expression to understand how methylation regulates levels
of expression.

Upon completion of this study, Dr. Wayne's laboratory will have
proof-of-principle for evaluation of the canine methylome. Ultimately,
he intends to establish a public web-based resource to serve as a
repository for the dog methylomes. The collection of methylomes they
generate will contribute to the growing resources that are available for
investigation of disease etiology as well as advancing therapeutic
approaches. These data will provide a new resource for understanding how
gene regulation through methylation affects phenotype, disease and
overall canine health".

Publication:

Thompson MJ, vonHoldt B, Horvath S, Pellegrini M. [An epigenetic aging clock for dogs and wolves](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5391218/). Aging (Albany NY). 2017;9(3):1055-1068.
