
AKCCHF grant \#00985-A (closed) ---  Samoyed Club of America Education and Research Foundation (SCARF)
=====================================================================================================

**Heather Chandler PhD, Ohio State University**

This is an AKCCHF Success Story!  [Looking for a New Treatment for
Refractive Corneal
Ulcers](http://www.akcchf.org/research/success-stories/looking-for-a-new-treatment.html)

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Currently, there are no well-established consistently effective
treatments for canine refractory ulcers. Anecdotal evidence as well as
investigations in human corneal wound healing, suggests an improved rate
of healing during tetracycline treatment. To date, there have been no
prospective studies that critically evaluate the effectiveness of
tetracycline in canine refractory ulcers.

We have thoroughly evaluated the effects of tetracycline on canine
corneal epithelial cell migration in vitro. In this study, we evaluated
the efficacy of tetracycline treatment in increasing the rate of corneal
re-epithelialization in clinical canine patients with refractory ulcers.
This provided rigorous clinical evidence of the effectiveness of
tetracycline treatments in canine refractory ulcers, thus identifying a
successful treatment for this disease. Client-owned patients affected
with refractory ulcers were randomly assigned to one of three treatment
groups. Treatment A was topical tetracycline, Treatment B was oral
tetracycline, and Treatment C was a placebo. The rate of corneal wound
healing was monitored over time and compared between the treatments.

Analysis of our data indicates that topical tetracycline is an effective
treatment for canine refractive ulcers. Dogs treated with topical
tetracycline had a significant improvement in wound healing compared to
the placebo. Oral tetracycline also improved corneal
re-epithelialization compared to the placebo, but the improvement was
not statistically significant. The majority of ulcers treated with
tetracycline healed at a faster rate when compared to the placebo
treated ulcers. The significance of this research involves improving
healing time and overall comfort in dogs affected by refractory ulcers.
Tetracycline can provide a safe, reliable, and cost effective treatment
for this disease."

**Publication: **

Chandler HL, Gemensky-Metzler AJ, B
