---
title: 'AKCCHF grant #01780 (open)'
---
**Defining the Mechanism by Which Ticks Locate Dogs in Order to Better
Prevent Disease Transmission.**

**Emma Natalie Ivy Weeks, PhD, University of Florida**

_**Update:  Progress Report 01/13/2017**_ [click here](/files/AKCCHF 01780 EY4 Summary.pdf)

_**Update:  Progress Report 2016**_ [click here](/files/AKCCHF 1780 MY4 Summary.pdf)

_**Update:  Progress Report October 2014**_ [click here](/files/AKCCHF grant 1780 MY2 Progress Report.pdf)

_**Project Summary from the AKCCHF.org website:**_

"The brown dog tick (BDT) is common across the U.S. and is the most
widely distributed tick in the world. BDT's carry and transmit the
pathogens that cause debilitating diseases such as canine ehrlichiosis
and babesiosis. Prevention of these diseases is accomplished through
tick control. BDT's can complete their entire life cycle indoors,
making management difficult. Records of infestations are increasing and
unpublished data indicates that a high level of pesticide resistance is
present in domestic populations. Consequently once introduced, these
ticks are particularly hard to eradicate and as one female tick may lay
5,000 eggs, the problem soon gets out-of-hand. Pesticide resistance
leads to aggressive treatment regimes, which in turn, lead to increased
exposure of humans and pets to chemical residues. Alternatives to
pesticides are needed. Studies have shown that BDT's are attracted to
dog odor, a blend of volatile chemicals used by ticks to find a blood
meal.

In this study, Dr. Weeks will identify the chemicals BDT's use to
locate a dog. This will enable manipulation of tick behavior thereby
facilitating management and reducing the need for extensive use of
pesticides. Improved tick control without the need for increased
environmental pesticide applications will improve the quality of life
for dogs and their owners."
