+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #00945 (closed)"
+++

**Albert E Jergens, DVM, PhD, Iowa State University**

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"Canine inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic intestinal
disorder likely resulting from the interaction between genes and
environmental factors. We propose to utilize unique molecular biology
tools to: (1) identify key genetic factors contributing to disease
expression, (2) characterize gene expression profiles which may predict
responsiveness to specific therapies, and (3) provide the framework upon
which to facilitate identification of IBD susceptibility genes that
predispose specific canine breeds to clinical disease.

We are making good progress towards these goals as evidenced by the
following: We have collected samples from a representative heterogeneous
population of 18 IBD dogs for comparison to 6 healthy dog tissues. We
have carefully extracted the genetic material (RNA) from endoscopic
samples which will be used in our gene profiling studies.  We have now
evaluated gene expression profiles in the normal versus diseased dog
groups using sophisticated statistical modeling to help us \'tease out\'
gene expression patterns which discern healthy versus diseased
intestinal tissues. It is our expectation to identify specific genes
which serve as biomarkers for diagnosing canine IBD and for monitoring
the effects of therapy. We have now identified a grouping of 17
\'marker\' genes that may be more critically assessed in future
studies.  We have noted that IBD dogs show differences in intestinal
gene expression as compared to healthy dogs; and these differences in
expression may help to explain the mechanisms of chronic inflammation in
affected dogs. We have preliminary evidence that changes in the
intestinal bacteria accompany the abnormal gene patterns.

It is our belief that this association should be explored more fully
with additional studies; since this situation is identical to the
association between people and their intestinal bacterial populations
causing human IBD (i.e., Crohn\'s disease and ulcerative colitis). We
have now confirmed the expression patterns of select differentially
expressed genes in diseased dogs using sophisticated molecular
techniques. This suggests that the observations regarding gene
expression patterns using the gene chips are accurate.\"

**Publications:**

Suchodolski JS, Xenoulis PG, Paddock CG, Steiner JM and Jergens AE
(2010) [Molecular analysis of the bacterial microbiota in duodenal
biopsies from dogs with idiopathic inflammatory bowel
disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19959301)Veterinary
Microbiology. 142, 394-400.

Suchodolski JS, Dowd SE, Wilke V, Steiner JM, Jergens AE.  [16S rRNA
Gene Pyrosequencing Reveals Bacterial Dysbiosis in the Duodenum of Dogs
with Idiopathic Inflammatory Bowel
Disease.](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0039333) 
2012.  PLoS One 7(6):e39333
