+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #00613 (closed)"
+++

Matthew Breen, PhD, North Carolina State University

***Project Summary from AKCCHF.org website:***

"In the USA it is estimated than over 300,000 dogs each years are
diagnosed with lymphoma. Despite improvements in veterinary medicine,
the response to treatment for canine lymphoma continues to be highly
variable, with no reliable means to predict duration of remission. In
human lymphoma the presence of characteristic chromosome aberrations has
been shown to have both diagnostic and prognostic significance. With
previous funding from the AKC-CHF, the investigators identified a series
of recurrent chromosome aberrations in canine lymphoma, some of which
also correlate with different sub-types of lymphoma. In particular they
identified that specific regions of the canine genome differ in copy
number in lymphoma patients compared to healthy individuals. In a
healthy individual all genes are present as two copies, while in cancer
cells the number may vary from zero copies to numerous copies. The
investigators proposed that copy number of select regions of the canine
genome might be associated with response to therapy and thus correlate
with duration of remission.

For this study they used a population of archival tumor (lymph node)
specimens from canine lymphoma patients that had been recruited as part
of a clinical trial. The patient samples were of numerous breeds, both
genders, from across the USA and had a wide range of ages. At the time
of diagnosis, each patient has a lymph node biopsy taken that was fixed
in formalin and embedded in paraffin blocks. These formed the archival
sample population used for the present study. All patients were
subsequently treated for their lymphoma with single agent doxorubicin
and were clinically monitored during the course of their treatment and
beyond. As part of the clinical follow-up the duration of first
remission was noted. Cells of lymphoma patients were extracted from the
FFPE specimens and prepared on glass slides. A series of DNA probes was
developed to assess copy number of four select regions of the genome
using multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Using this
process they determined the mean copy number of each of the four regions
in each patient sample.

Statistical analysis of the data revealed that the mean copy number of
one of the four regions evaluated was significantly correlated with the
duration of disease free interval in the study population. This region
may thus be considered to have prognostic significance. By combining
these data with data from a parallel project (funded by Morris Animal
Foundation), they identified two regions of the canine genome that
together provided the means to predict duration of first remission of
lymphoma patients treated with single agent doxorubicin with 95%
confidence.

Over the past year, during a no cost extension, they have developed a
cytogenetic test that allows for these two regions to be evaluated
routinely. The merged data from both projects (CHF-613 and MAFDO5CA019)
were used to support a patent application and the resulting test has
been licensed to a large biomedical company to bring to market.

In addition they have evaluated the efficacy of this test to be able to
predict duration of remission in canine lymphoma patients that were
subsequently treated with multi-agent (CHOP) chemotherapy. These data
are pending but early indications suggest that the region identified as
part of CHF-613 is also significant in such cases.

In summary the outcome of this project is the development of the first
cytogenetic test to predict treatment response in a canine cancer. The
test should become widely available to the within the next year and will
provide owners and veterinarians a new source of added data as they
decide on the most appropriate treatment options for dogs diagnosed with
lymphoma. This work will now move forward to investigate the genes
within these two regions and determine their possible candidacy for new
therapies."

**Publication:**

Thomas, R, Seiser, El, Motsinger-Reif, A, Borst, L, Valli, Ve, Kelley,
K, Suter, Se, Argyle, D, Burgess, K, Bell, J, Lindblad-Toh, K, Modiano,
Jf and Breen, M (2011) [Refining tumor-associated aneuploidy through
\'genomic recoding\' of recurrent DNA copy number aberrations in 150
canine non-Hodgkin
lymphomas.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21375435) Leukemia &
Lymphoma 52:  1321-1335
