+++
title = "AKCCHF grant #00610 (closed)"
+++

**Samoyed enrollment for this study is closed.  SCARF wishes to thank
the efforts of many Samoyed owners for contributing to this research
study.  **

**Sponsors**: \
Samoyed Club of America Education & Research Foundation, Inc.,
Australian Terrier Club of America, , San Joaquin Kennel Club

**Researcher**: \
Rebecka S. Hess, DVM, DACVIM, University of Pennsylvania School of
Veterinary Medicine

In a retrospective study  on diabetes mellitus (DM), Dr. Hess found that
Samoyeds were 12 times more likely to develop DM than mixed dog breeds.
([**click here for
abstract**](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=10800511&dopt=Abstract))

**Project Summary from the AKCCHF.org website:** 

"The study of genetic markers for diabetes mellitus in Samoyeds and
Australian Terriers has progressed. The researchers pursued their
preliminary association of a DNA difference between diabetic and
non-diabetic Australian Terriers and Samoyeds and continued with the
analysis of our preliminary study of DNA variation across the entire
genome. The National and Regional Breed Clubs have been instrumental in
getting the word out, in regard to sample collection. They have reached
their goal of collecting blood samples from more than 100 diabetic dogs
(50 of each Samoyeds and Australian Terriers), and more than 200
non-diabetic dogs (100 each for Australian Terriers and Samoyeds). The
investigators thank the participating clubs and the hundreds of dog
owners that have helped make this project possible. Please contact Dr.
Hess (rhess\@vet.upenn.edu) if your dog donated blood for the study
while it was not diabetic and has since become diabetic.

The project's WGA results are very intriguing, and indicate that the
underlying basis of Type I diabetes, while not identical in both breeds,
may have some common etiology as well. These findings emphasize the
power of within breed studies. In the future, we would like to perform
SNP chip analysis on additional samples, with follow-up on regions of
highest statistical (and genome wide) significance. The insulin gene in
Australian terriers deserves more study, with particular attention to
the possibility of long-range cis regulatory regions. Also, the DLA
region could be more thoroughly explored, particularly in collaboration
with Dr. Lorna Kennedy, who is studying this region in depth."

For more information on diabetes, [click
here](http://www.samoyedhealthfoundation.com/research/current-research-studies/diseases/diabetes-mellitus).
