---
title: Hemangiosarcoma
layout: disease
---

**Liaison:** Jan Young

**Email:** [jannermd@yahoo.com](mailto:jannermd@yahoo.com)

Canine hemangiosarcoma is a highly malignant, rapidly spreading cancer
of the cells that line the blood vessels. As the cancer grows, because
it involves the blood vessels, it disrupts blood supply to involved
tissue and causes bleeding. Bleeding can be insidious (without symptoms)
and chronic for a period of time, or can be sudden and massive resulting
in rapid death. Any age or breed of dog can have hemangiosarcoma but it
is most common in middle age or older dogs and in large breeds. It is,
interestingly, extremely rare in humans and in cats.

## Signs and Symptoms

There are three basic forms of hemangiosarcoma and signs and symptoms
are related to the form:

1. Dermal (skin): This involves the blood vessels of the skin, which,
   in the area of the tumor, become extensive and fragile and
   eventually bleed, causing swelling, bruising, and/or pain in the
   area of the tumor, and may cause a more generalized anemia
   (characterized by fatigue, pale mucous membranes). Bleeding bouts
   may come and go but once recognized and brought to the attention of
   a vet, a diagnosis can be made. This is the least severe form of the
   disease because it is more often (perhaps a third of the time)
   discovered before metastases occurs and is more amenable to direct
   treatment.
2. Hypodermal (below the skin): This is more insidious (without
   symptoms) allowing the tumor to grow and metastasize without its
   presence being known. Eventually either this tumor or a metastasis
   of it will bleed and cause symptoms. If the bleeding occurs in the
   primary hypodermal tumor, there may be local swelling, discoloration
   and/or pain, and again, because of the blood loss, there may be more
   generalized signs of anemia (fatigue, pale mucous membranes). There
   may be multiple bouts with relative recovery before the dog is
   brought to a vet and the diagnosis is suspected. As many as two
   thirds of dogs with hypodermal hemangiosarcomas have visceral
   metastases at the time of diagnosis, and hence incurable disease.
3. Visceral (usually spleen or cardiac): Again, early on, there are
   typically no symptoms, but because of this, once there are symptoms,
   it is usually because the cancer has spread (metastasized) such that
   it is incurable. The spleen and heart are the most common organs
   involved but primary tumors and metastases can and do occur in any
   blood vessel in the body. Visceral hemangiosarcoma (either primary
   or metastatic) has the worst prognosis and is almost universally
   fatal within months, even with aggressive treatment.

Hemangiosarcoma grows rapidly but is painless as it grows and spreads.
Eventually there is internal bleeding which can be intermittent and
cause brief episodes of pain and/or swelling, and sometimes anemia with
paleness of mucous membranes. The dog may recover from these for periods
of time. During these times, if the blood loss is great enough, the dog
may show signs of fatigue or weakness. And during these times, even
though the dog may seem to improve, the cancer is aggressively spreading
and metastasizing to other areas of the body. There may be disruptions
of organ function such as abnormal heart rhythms, loss of appetite,
weight loss, or clotting disorders. Eventually there is rupture of a
large tumor, resulting in severe hemorrhage, collapse, shock and even
death. By the time of diagnosis, the cancer has almost always spread to
the point of being incurable.

## Causes

The cause of canine hemangiosarcoma is not known but is believed to be,
at least in part, genetic because it is so common in dogs and in certain
breeds of dog, but not in other animals. Environmental factors also play
a role.

## Risk Factors

Specific risk factors are not known. Sun exposure can contribute to the
development of dermal hemangiosarcoma in light colored dogs with thin
coats. Studies are underway to attempt to identify risk factors in high
risk breeds.

## Diagnostic Tests

Diagnosis is difficult and often occurs too late. Examination of a dog
may show signs of anemia or fluid collection in the abdomen. Your vet
will most likely perform routine lab tests and tests to look for
abnormal clotting, and may aspirate fluid from the abdomen to see if
there is blood. X-rays may be helpful in determining the extent of
involvement, and ultrasound may be useful to determine heart and/or
spleen involvement. Biopsies may be helpful and may provide a definitive
diagnosis, but are also potentially dangerous as they may precipitate
bleeding.

## Treatment Guidelines

> **Note:** Treatment of animals should only be performed by a licensed
> veterinarian. Veterinarians should consult the current literature and
> current pharmacological formularies before initiating any treatment
> protocol.

Treatment depends on the location of the tumor. Dermal tumors are most
successfully treated as they often can be completely removed through
surgery and treated with radiation therapy. Visceral involvement is much
more difficult to treat and is rarely curative because of the high rate
of metastasis. Surgery and chemotherapy are used but typically extend
life only a few months at best.

## References

[Hemangiosarcoma. Modiano Lab at the University of Minnesota](https://modianolab.org/index.php/cancer-info/hemangiosarcoma/) ![two bones rating](/img/2-bones.png)

## Suggested Links

[Hemangiosarcoma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hemangiosarcoma) at Wikipedia ![two bones rating](/img/2-bones.png)

[Hemangiosarcoma](https://web.archive.org/web/20150602013549/http://www.caninecancer.com/Hemangiosarcoma.html) at caninecancer.com ![one bone rating](/img/1-bone.png)

## SCARF-Sponsored Research

- [AKCCHF Grant #02534](/research/current-studies/akcchf-grant-02534/): Clinical Trial for Evaluation of Propranolol and Doxorubicin in the Treatment of Canine Hemangiosarcoma. Erin Dickerson PhD, Brian Husbands DVM, University of MN
- [MAF Grant D13CA-062:](/research/current-studies/morris-animal-foundation-grant-d13ca-062) Assessing How a Protein Helps Hemangiosarcoma Cells Survive. Erin B Dickerson, PhD, University of Minnesota
- [AKCCHF grant #01139):](/research/current-studies/akcchf-grant-01139) Immune Targeting of Canine Hemangiosarcoma Using a Canine Derived Single Chain Antibody Approach. Nicola J Mason, BVetMed, PhD, University of Pennsylvania

## "Living with a Disorder" Journal Entries

- [Hemangiosarcoma 1](/diseases/hemangiosarcoma-hemangiosarcoma-1)
- [Hemangiosarcoma 2](/diseases/hemangiosarcoma-hemangiosarcoma-2)
