---
title: "In the blink of an eye"
layout: single
---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. [see complete disclaimer at bottom of page]_

---

LIVING WITH KCS OR "DRY EYE"

If your Sammy is diagnosed with "dry eye," join the club. More and more
dogs and more and more people are being diagnosed with this condition.

I have two Sammies with "dry eye." They have made me an expert on the
topic because they presented me with different symptoms, different tear
production measurements, different protocols and different levels of
response to treatment.

# PATIENT #1

**Age at Onset:** 6 years, 2 months.

**Sex:** Spayed female

**How the Diagnosis was made:** The patient was presented to her
veterinarian with red, inflamed eyes and dull corneas. The onset of
symptoms was immediate. Because the corneas appeared dull, a "Schirmer
Tear Test" was done to measure the level of tear production. Both eyes
had a measurement of less than 2mm. Fluorescein stain was applied to
detect any corneal scratching. None was detected.

**Prescribed Medications:** The patient was prescribed Optimmune®. I was
instructed to apply a ¼ inch strip to each eye, 2x a day, once every 12
hours for the duration of the patient's life. I was also instructed to
apply a ¼ inch strip of artificial tears lubricating eye ointment to
each eye at bedtime for the duration of the patient's life.

The patient was re-evaluated in 4 days, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 12
weeks and every month thereafter until the tear production levels
measured 15mm. It took almost 12 weeks for the patient to exhibit a
response to the medication and almost 12 months for the levels to
measure 15mm.

**Additional Tests:** A blood test was done to test for Hypothyroidism.
The test results were negative.

## PATIENT #2

**Age at Onset:** 6 years, 3 months.

**Sex:** Neutered male.

**How the Diagnosis was made:** The patient was presented to his
veterinarian with thick, white mucus covering both eyes and a greenish
mucoid discharge around both eyes. The onset of symptoms was immediate.
A "Schirmer Tear Test" was done to measure the level of tear production.
The right eye had a measurement of 6mm, the left eye had a measurement
of 9mm. Fluorescein stain was applied to detect any corneal scratching.
None was detected.

**Prescribed Medications:** Because the patient has a concurrent
unrelated eye condition, he was referred to his veterinary
ophthalmologist for evaluation/treatment. The ophthalmologist prescribed
Optimmune® and *Refresh*® *Celluvisc*® (carboxymethylcellulose sodium --
1.0%) lubricating eye drops. I was instructed to apply a ¼ inch strip of
Optimmune® to each eye, 4x a day (once every 6 hours) and one drop
of *Refresh*® *Celluvisc*® in each eye 5 minutes later.

The patient was re-evaluated in 2 weeks. At 2 weeks, the patient showed
an immediate response to the medication. At six months, the patient had
a tear production measurement in excess of 22mm in each eye.

The medications (Optimmune® and *Refresh*® *Celluvisc*®) have been
reduced to 2x a day, once every 12 hours, for the duration of the
patient's life. I was also instructed to apply a ¼ inch strip of
artificial tears lubricating eye ointment to each eye at bedtime for the
duration of the patient's life.

**What you need to know about Optimmune® Ophthalmic
Ointment:**Optimmune® is prescribed for ophthalmic use in dogs only and
U.S. Federal law restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a
licensed veterinarian. Each gram of Optimmune® contains 2 mg of
cyclosporine, USP; petrolatum, USP; corn oil, NF; and Amerchol® CAB
base.

**Precautions:** A target animal safety study and clinical field studies
with Optimmune® showed a wide safety margin in adult dogs. In the
6-month target animal safety study, dogs were subjected twice daily to
up to 10 times the approved concentration of Optimmune®. No apparent
toxicity or adverse reactions were observed. Dogs in this study were
vaccinated with commercially available vaccines. No effect on antibody
titer response was noted. Epiphora was noted in all groups, including
the placebo group, and was not associated with any inflammatory change,
nor was there any correlation to gross and histopathological changes.

The safety of Optimmune® has not been determined in puppies, pregnant
bitches or dogs used for breeding. (See Breeding Recommendations below.)

**Adverse reactions:** In one trial, of 36 cases evaluated for safety,
adverse reactions were noted in 2 animals (5.6%). One involved transient
hyperemia (redness), epiphora (excessive tearing) and mild discomfort of
the eye. The other involved pericocular/palpebral (eyelid) inflammation
and mild alopecia (hair loss).

On rare occasions, instillation of Optimmune® may be associated with
local irritation as manifested by periocular redness, lid spasm, and
excessive rubbing. As the eyes of dogs with "dry eye" often demonstrate
considerable inflammation, it is difficult to determine whether this
local irritation constitutes a hypersensitivity to Optimmune®. If this
ocular irritation persists beyond 7 days, hypersensitivity to a
component of Optimmune® should be suspected and therapeutic options
reassessed.

My male's veterinary ophthalmologist indicated that "white coated" dogs
are more likely to experience sensitivity to Optimmune®.

**About the tube:** Optimmune® is 3.5g in a 10g tube. This means that
more than half of the tube is full of air. The air needs emptying out
initially when the tube is first opened. The first time the tube is
squeezed, the product in the nozzle is ejected suddenly and the small
amount in the nozzle will be ejected suddenly. This is inevitable.

The tube should be kept at room temperature. Store between 36° and 86°F.
If it is particularly warm, the base becomes oily and it is difficult to
administer the ¼ inch dose.

Don't roll up the tube -- this will crack the tube and contaminate the
drug.

_Schering-Plough_ (the manufacturer) recommends that you discard any
unused product 4 weeks after opening. The tube does not contain any
preservatives or antimicrobials.

**Dosage and Administration:** Remove any eye debris with a suitable
nonirritating solution prior to application. Aim to apply a ¼ inch strip
to the affected eye(s) every 12 hours. It is recommended to keep
treatments evenly spaced and results are best when just a ¼ inch strip
is applied twice daily. The ointment may be placed directly on the
cornea or into the conjunctival sac. The ointment will spread over the
eye with normal blinking.

For best results, cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment should be
administered early in the course of the disease before irreversible
damage to the lacrimal tissue or corneal scarring or pigmentation
occurs.

Dogs with "dry eye" will most likely require lifelong consistent
therapy. Withdrawal of Optimmune® will result in rapid clinical
regression.

## HINTS OR HOW I FIGHT THE DAILY BATTLE AGAINST "DRY EYE" AND WIN!

To my babies, I'm a super hero. I made their eyes feel better and all it
took was a little bit of cyclosporine applied to their eyes 2x a day. My
female patient insists on getting her "treatment" first. This is how I
do it:

- I apply the ointment every morning and evening between 7 and 7:30
  and apply a ¼ inch strip of artificial tears lubricating eye
  ointment to each eye at noontime, if I'm at home, and always at
  bedtime.

- I make every effort and care (I'm not always successful) to apply
  just a ¼ inch strip to their corneas (the first application is, as
  mentioned above, tricky). Why? Because this ointment is very oily
  and some of the ointment will "ooze" onto the skin and hairs
  surrounding the eyes. Every effort must be made to reduce the amount
  of ointment leakage/discharge. I know from experience that excess
  oil can, during heat spells, create yeast that will cause
  periocular/palpebral inflammation and temporary hair loss
  (alopecia). Obviously, the greater the amount of ointment applied,
  the greater the amount of discharge.

- Five minutes after I apply the Optimmune®, I apply one drop
  of *Refresh*® *Celluvisc*® in each eye. This is not only soothing to
  the eye but my male's veterinary ophthalmologist finds that the drop
  acts as a barrier against any ointment discharge.

- Five minutes later, I apply a warm compress to each eye for about a
  minute and wipe away any oily discharge.

- I am always careful to administer lots of kisses after each
  treatment. My male patient returns the favor by licking my eyes (I
  guess he thinks he's giving me drops!).

- Each dog has their own tube of Optimmune® and artificial tear
  lubricating eye ointment. The Refresh® Celluvisc® comes in sterile,
  one dosage containers.

**BREEDING ADVICE**

All the literature I've read indicates that affected dogs should not be
used for breeding. This may be because the safety of Optimmune® has not
been determined in pregnant bitches or dogs used for breeding.

---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. There may be discussions of drugs, devices, additives, foods, vitamins, herbs or biologicals that have not been approved by the FDA/CVM for the particular use being discussed. SCARF assumes no liability for the accuracy or outcomes of any suggestions, advice or other information provided by the "Living With..." postings on the SCARF website. All treatment decisions should only be made after discussion with your pet's veterinary health professional, and no changes in your pet's treatments or diet should be made based on any information found on the SCARF website._
