---
title: "Mammary tumors"
layout: single
---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. [see complete disclaimer at bottom of page]_

---

Here are two biopsy results of 2 lumps removed in separate surgeries
from the area of the most posterior (inguinal) nipples of an 11 year old
female spayed at the age of 7. The first was cancerous, the second
benign. She is now 15 (2011) and while an additional mammary lump is
being monitored it is unchanging and no further surgeries are
contemplated.

**Biopsy Single Tissue**

**HISTOLOGY NUMBER 7-13374**

GROSS DESCRIPTION: Received a 4.6 x 1.4 cm section of haired skin and
associated mammary tissue. Multiple small firm masses were noted.

HISTOLOGY:

MAMMARY GLAND: Involving the mammary gland, there are multiple,
variably-sized, moderately cellular, unencapsulated, and well-defined
masses. The masses appear to be composed of multiple ductular structures
that contain proliferating and disorganized epithelial cells. The cells
are cuboidal to polygonal with distinct cell margins and a moderate
amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei are cenral, oval, and have
finely stippled chromatin and 1-2 prominent eosinophilic nucleoli.
Individual cells show prominent karyomegaly and 4-fold anisokaryosis.
Frequently within the centers of these lesions, necrosis is a feature.
The mitotic rate is variable but in some high power fields, up to 5
mitotic figures are noted. These lesions are encircled by a modest
amount of fibrous stroma. Numerous inflammatory cells are noted and
include lymphocytes and plasma cells. Small areas of squamous
differentiation are seen.

MICROSCOPIC INTERPRETATION:

MAMMARY MASS: MAMMARY CARCINOMA WITH SQUAMOUS DIFFERENTIATION

COMMENT: The mass is interpreted to be a malignancy arising within the
mammary tissue. Based on histopathology alone, it is difficult to know
if there are multiple mammary carcinomas that are developing
independently within the mammary ducts or whether this represents
infiltrative behavior of a solitary mass. Based on the sections
examined, this lesion may have been completely removed but changes do
extend close to the tissue margins. For this reason, you may want to
periodically monitor this site for recurrence. The owner should also
periodically monitor the remainder of the mammary tissue for development
of additional masses as dogs that develop one type of mammary tumor
frequently go on to develop additional lesions. In the sections of
tissue examined, lymphatic invasion is not identified but it still may
be prudent to assess the regional lymph nodes. You may also want to
consider thoracic radiographs.

**Biopsy Single Tissue**

**HISTOLOGY NUMBER 7-12619**

GROSS DESCRIPTION:

One brown smooth firm fatty irregular mass 2.5 x 2.5 cm.

HISTOLOGY:

Two sections of the mass were examined and both exhibit similar
findings. There is a large mass of multilobulated well-differentiated
adipose tissue interspersed with areas of acute hemorrhage. At one
margin of the biopsy is a focus of well-differentiated mammary ducts.

MICROSCOPIC INTERPRETATION:

LIPOMA

COMMENT:

Histopathological changes observed today are compatible with LIPOMA.
Lipomas are benign connective tissue tumors composed of histologically
normal adipose tissue. It has been postulated that lipomas may
represent regions of nodular hyperplasia or altered lipocyte metabolism
rather than true neoplasia. Because lipomas have no defined microscopic
borders, gross inspection at the time of surgery is a better judge of
completeness of resection than microscopic examination. Development of
additional lipomas is common. While excision is most often curative,
these may recur locally. (References: Veterinary Dermatopathology.
pp. 430-431, 1992. Tumors in Domestic Animals. 4th ed. P31. 2001)

---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. There may be discussions of drugs, devices, additives, foods, vitamins, herbs or biologicals that have not been approved by the FDA/CVM for the particular use being discussed. SCARF assumes no liability for the accuracy or outcomes of any suggestions, advice or other information provided by the "Living With..." postings on the SCARF website. All treatment decisions should only be made after discussion with your pet's veterinary health professional, and no changes in your pet's treatments or diet should be made based on any information found on the SCARF website._
