---
title: "Inertia Experiences"
layout: single
---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. [see complete disclaimer at bottom of page]_

---

I have faced this disorder several times with my bitches, both Primary
and Secondary Inertia. Vets will act if they see green fluid or do a
physical exam and see a dilated cervix, but to get them to exam a bitch
for Primary Inertia just because she 'looks uncomfortable' can be quite
a challenge. A major problem can be persuading your Veterinary Surgeon
to see the bitch if she is only, say, 59 days in whelp. I have
experienced this more than once.

The last time it happened, it was with a 6 year old bitch having her
fourth litter. I had an inkling something was amiss in the pregnancy at
about 4 weeks and persuaded my vet that as this was to be her last
litter we should do an elective Caesar at 60 days. The first obstacle is
that according to most vets that you talk to, bitches whelp at 63 days
and never before. Any breeder who has experienced this in practical
terms is lucky. I have had bitches go from 59 to 64 days. But Vets don't
see the normal stuff about whelping, just the problems and they think
all bitches whelp at 63 days. After a lot of persuasion and a bit of the
'I am the customer' she agreed. On the morning the bitch was due to go
in, she seemed OK, but by the time we were at the Surgery, there was a
dark green discharge and she looked distinctly unhappy. As the surgery
was ready for her anyway, she was whisked in and caesared. There were 3
live puppies who went on to be quite normal and happy little souls.

On another occasion I was rushing a heavily pregnant bitch to the vet
and a puppy just fell out of her. There were no contractions on the part
of the bitch and no verbal warning (sometimes bitches can be quite vocal
when giving birth) The bitch in question was 63 days pregnant with 8
puppies waiting to start life. The actual volume and pressure from the
puppies was so immense that when the cervix opened and she was tumbled
about in the car, a puppy just fell out complete with placenta. With
that puppy out of the way, the internal pressure reduced but she had no
further contractions so had to be C-sectioned

On a third occasion, a four year old bitch happily whelped 3 puppies and
then stopped contracting. After 90 minutes we called the vet out and she
gave three Oxytocin injections over an hour and a half and one puppy
appeared, but only one. We ended up with a C-section to get the
remaining two puppies, which were fine.

Nowadays and taking these experiences and others into account, I would
always Caesar whenever Inertia occurs.

---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. There may be discussions of drugs, devices, additives, foods, vitamins, herbs or biologicals that have not been approved by the FDA/CVM for the particular use being discussed. SCARF assumes no liability for the accuracy or outcomes of any suggestions, advice or other information provided by the "Living With..." postings on the SCARF website. All treatment decisions should only be made after discussion with your pet's veterinary health professional, and no changes in your pet's treatments or diet should be made based on any information found on the SCARF website._
