---
title: "Living with UDS (VKH)"
layout: single
---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. [see complete disclaimer at bottom of page]_

---

My Samoyed bitch was diagnosed with UDS in November of 1998 at the age
of 5y 7mo. I initially noticed that she was losing pigment. Her eye rims
and her lips and her nose all turned pink. When she began squinting, I
took her to my regular veterinarian who diagnosed her as having uveitis
and began treating her with topical dexamethasone. When a knowledgeable
Samoyed owner suggested that my dog might have VKH (UDS), I mentioned
this to my veterinarian, who, never having heard of this disease entity,
recommended an ophthalmological consultation. A microscopic eye
examination confirmed the diagnosis of VKH. The inflammation had already
caused a detached retina in her left eye as well as an elevated
intraocular pressure (glaucoma) in her right eye. She was started on
high dose prednisone and azathioprine and treated for the glaucoma.
Everything returned to normal after a few weeks and the pigment on her
eye rims and lips returned. The pigment on her nose partially returned.
The dosages of prednisone and azathioprine were gradually lowered until
she was only getting a single dose of azathioprine once every two weeks.
Over the next six months she had two relapses, including a recurrence of
the retinal detachment as well as the glaucoma. The glaucoma caused loss
of vision in her right eye, and was treated with surgery to destroy the
ciliary cells and implant a shunt to allow for better drainage. Eighteen
months later she had a second surgery to unclog the shunt when her
pressure again began to rise. She developed a cataract in her right,
glaucomatous eye and eventually had a medical procedure (injection of
gentamicin into the eye) to essentially kill the ciliary cells that
produce aqueous humor, thus preventing the pain caused by increased
pressure. She remained on a combination of low dose prednisone and
azathioprine for the remainder of her life, and eventually lost vision
in her left eye as a result of cataract formation approximately 2 months
before she died at the age of 12 years 8 months. Death was not from UDS,
although I cannot rule out that years of treatment with prednisone and
azathioprine didn't contribute to her death.

The difficult aspect of living with UDS is the variability in the course
of the disease and the uncertainty with respect to the course of
treatment. In our case, approximately six weeks after the initial high
doses of immunosuppressants and what appeared to be a complete
remission, the disease returned along with the secondary retinal
detachment and glaucoma. A second relapse occurred a few months later,
which resulted in loss of vision in the right eye. Each case is
different, and the correct long-term medication cannot be empirically
determined. One has to weigh the potential damage caused by UDS versus
the potential damage resulting from the medication. In our case,
cirrhosis of the liver was diagnosed at the age of 11 years 8 months.
There is no way to tell whether the medication precipitated the liver
disease. As with other autoimmune diseases, it is recommended that
vaccinations be discontinued, including that for rabies, since
stimulation of the immune system has the potential to activate
autoimmunity as well.

On the bright side, we were able to continue to successfully compete in
both agility and obedience even after vision was lost in the right eye.
Competition came to an end as the result of age-related mobility
problems, not UDS.

---

**Disclaimer:**

_Information presented in the "Living With..." sections of the SCARF website represent the personal viewpoint of the individual who made the journal entry and do not represent the opinions, positions, or viewpoints of SCARF or the veterinary community. There may be discussions of drugs, devices, additives, foods, vitamins, herbs or biologicals that have not been approved by the FDA/CVM for the particular use being discussed. SCARF assumes no liability for the accuracy or outcomes of any suggestions, advice or other information provided by the "Living With..." postings on the SCARF website. All treatment decisions should only be made after discussion with your pet's veterinary health professional, and no changes in your pet's treatments or diet should be made based on any information found on the SCARF website._
